# Planetary Defense -- Tutorial

This page gives a brief introduction on how to start playing Planetary Defense.

Most controls should have helpful tooltips, so use them to understand what is what.

## Getting started

After starting the game and generating a new world, you see your planet and some minimal UI.

First, zoom in (using the mouse wheel) and move the mouse over the planet.
Below the top-left buttons, the vegetation type below the mouse is displayed.

Find an area where "Temperate forest" and "Tropical forest" meet.
Click "Build" (`Ctrl+B`), then "City" (`C`), and place the city so that these two vegetation types are both in its range.

Congratulations, you built your first city!

To manage cities, see section [Cities](#cities).

For now, end the turn by pressing "Turn" in the top right corner.

## Cities

Cities are the most important entity in the game.
Each city controls a certain, extensible area and uses it to produce and convert commodities.

To manage a city, simply click it.
A different GUI, for managing the city, will appear.

At the left, there are buttons to assign land use, and to build facilities like ports.
Below these, there are controls to set the city's preferences when auto-managing land use.

Land use can only be assigned to cells if there are free workers available.
At the bottom left, the statistics for the city under the mouse are shown.
The numbers behind the city's name denote the free and total workers.

With right-click, land use can be cleared, which frees workers.
Try it by right-clicking crops that the city should have assigned automatically.
Then, select "Crops" and assign them to a different cell with left-click.

Also note the upper bottom-left box.
It shows which land use is possible on the cell under the mouse, and how much of which commodity it would produce.

## Economy

The economy is based on three commodities: food, resources and products (plus electricity in the future).

**Food** is required by all workers except those producing food themselves.

**Resources** are extracted by workers, and transformed into **Products** in factories (also requires workers).

Finally, **Products** are required to maintain military facilities, and for cities to grow.

```
 Resources ==[Factory]=> Products
          \   /           |   |
           \ /            |   V
 Food --> Workers         |   Facilities
                          |   (e.g. Military)
                          V
                       City growth
```

Production is local to cities, but everything can be transported along the [Transport network](transport-network).

## Finances

At the top of the main screen, production and finances are displayed.
Hover the mouse over the individual items so see what they mean.

Taxes are generated by and commodity produced and consumed.

Expenses need to be payed to maintain cities, roads etc., as well as for transports.

## Transport network

Cities need to be connected to exchange commodities.
Cities can be connected by roads using the respective button on the main screen.

Once cities are connected, commodities automatically flow as needed, as long there is sufficient network capacity.
Road utilization is depicted by increasingly reddish tint of the roads.

To inspect overall flows, see section [Flows](#flows).

## Flows

Press button "Flows" (`Ctrl+F`) on the main screen to inspect city-to-city flows be commodity.

The flows screen also shows the total production and consumption stats of your civilization (see the tooltips).

## Defenses

TODO

## City growth

TODO
